---
title: Homebrew
date: 2017-11-21 18:57:30
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2018/homebrew.jpg
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/2018/homebrew.jpg
categories:
  - Professional
  - Technology
tags:
  - homebrew
  - how to
  - macOS
---
In some of my [previous post](https://www.google.com/search?newwindow=1&source=hp&ei=0I0SWunYHYzfwQLtsILIAg&q=site%3Aluispuerto.net+homebrew&oq=site%3Aluispuerto.net+homebrew&gs_l=psy-ab.3...1475.7353.0.7624.31.26.0.0.0.0.231.2445.6j13j1.20.0....0...1.1.64.psy-ab..11.3.421.0..0j46j35i39k1j0i46k1j0i20i263k1j0i10k1.0.iYax6bPPbHc) [e.g. [1](/blog/2017/10/19/trash-instead-of-rm/), [2](/blog/2017/11/04/installing-pgp-signing-for-git-on-macos/), [3](/blog/2017/11/05/set-rstudio-with-homebrews-git/) or [4](/blog/2017/11/10/media-buttons-behavior-changed-high-sierra/) ] I've been using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) to install some _pieces of software_ in my Mac using the terminal, or shell. But, perhaps you've been wondering what is exactly Homebrew? It defines itself as "the missing [package manager](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Package_manager) for macOS". Yet… what is a package manager? A package manager is a small piece of software that helps you to manage other software —packages— in your computer, or in other words, to install, update, setup and uninstall software. Package managers have been a classic in most linux distributions and most linux users are accustomed to the idea to install software through them, whether on a GUI (graphical user interface) or just on a CLI (command line interface). You as a macOS user probably are also used to a GUI package manager, the [Mac App Store](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mac_App_Store), that allow you to install Apps easily and keep it updated. It doesn't uninstall it for you, or clean the config files, though.

However, you usually need more software that the one you can find in the Mac App Store, and even more if you are a bit of an advance user. For example, you probably need to install [Java](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_(programming_language)), [Flash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adobe_Flash_Player), [Git](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git), [R (the stats software)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R_(programming_language)) or other apps that aren't available on the Mac App Store for different reasons. To manage that software and apps Homebrew was created.

{% include figure image_path="assets/images/blog/2018/Screen-Shot-2017-11-19-at-21.22.27.png" alt="List of all my installed forumulas" caption="List of all my installed formulas" %}

Homebrew is a really simple thing, it's just a Git [repository](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core) full of Ruby scripts that you download to your machine and they install, update or uninstall the software with a given set of parameters or options that user can set. Those scripts are called _formulas_ in the Homebrew terminology —as you soon will discover, Homebrew terminology is everything about beer. You can easily install Homebrew using your terminal with the following command.

```shell
/usr/bin/ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"
```

From there on, you can start to use Homebrew in the same way as any other command on terminal. To use Homebrew you just have to type `info` if you want more info about it. Homebrew install itself on the folder `/usr/local/Homebrew` and it's going to install your software in the folder `/usr/local/Cellar`.

{% include figure image_path="assets/images/blog/2018/Screen-Shot-2017-11-20-at-10.33.04.png" alt="The Cellar of Homebrew" caption="The Cellar of Homebrew" %}


When you install a _formula_ with Homebrew, it usually creates symbolic links to the folder `/usr/local` —usually to the `/usr/local/bin`. but it could create more links to other folders there— to make that software available to the whole system. However, there are some _formulas_ that aren't linked to `/usr/local` and they are considered _keg-only_, or in other words, they are there just to be used for other formulas as dependencies. You can change that, though, and link it manually with `brew link`. Sometimes when you install a formula with Homebrew, you need to link it manually and/or force the linking, just because your system has already a symbolic link on `/usr/local/bin` for that same software but not manage by Homebrew. Like with the [Git case](/blog/2017/11/05/set-rstudio-with-homebrews-git/).

```shell
brew link -f formula-name # -f is a flag to force the linking in case there were already a symbolic link on /usr/local/bin
```

What are the advantages of using Homebrew? Mainly that you can forget about download any software yourself and keep it updated manually. Now, you just can download and install your software with a simple command on your terminal, and update or uninstall it. After you install Homebrew you just need to type this in your shell to install a _formula_:

```shell
brew install formula-name
```

But you probably are wondering… How can I know the name of the formula I want to install? It's quite easy, most of them are really intuitive, like for example Git one.

```shell
brew install git
```

Some other aren't that easy, but Homebrew has a search engine included.

```shell
brew search formula-name
```

And of course, you can look on internet for them. There are even some websites that are specialized on formulas, like <http://brewformulas.org>.

One of the advantages of Homebrew is you can install more than one formula at once, and you can even create shell scripts to install, uninstall or configure several formulas.

If you want to install more than one formula, it's pretty easy.

```shell
brew install formula-name-1 formula-name-2 formula-name-n ...
```

Another advantage of Homebrew is you can also choose how to install your software and you can even compile yourself from source code. If possible, Homebrew is going to install in your system a _bottle_ by default, the binaries of the already compiled software. Yet, you can ask Homebrew to download the source code and compile it in your computer. Compiling has advantages and disadvantages. The main disadvantage is that it takes time, for some packages up to half an hour or more to compile, really depends on your machine. Also takes resources. On the other hand you can really personalize your install and the software, giving you fully control of the software you install in your computer, giving extras from the original or _standard_ install. Even you can install software that is under development or it isn't available for Mac yet.

For example, I have a full Homebrew R install that allow me to have the last version of R before is available for Mac in CRAN. Since I've compiled it myself, I've [compiled with OpenBLAS](https://www.r-bloggers.com/for-faster-r-use-openblas-instead-better-than-atlas-trivial-to-switch-to-on-ubuntu/) which make R a little bit faster. I'll try to make a post soon about my installation of R and how to do yourself one.

Finally one of the best things about Homebrew is you can update all the software installed with it just with one command. Ok, the true is you need two, but you can chain them on just one.

```shell
brew update && brew upgrade
```

The first command is to update the list of _formulas_ you have available in the Homebrew repository and download to your computer. It's basically a `upgrade`, what you are doing is comparing the formulas you have installed with the Homebrew repository ones. If there is new versions of the formulas you have, Homebrew will installed them for you.

Besides of _formulas_, _kegs_ and _bottles_, Homebrew has also _taps_. Taps are third-party repositories additional to the core Homebrew. I think that the most famous one is [Homebrew-Cask](https://caskroom.github.io) `caskroom/cask`. Cask allows you to install GUI apps that are installed in `/Applications` folder of your Mac. To install Apps with cask is very simple.

```shell
brew cask install cask-name
```

There are several other _taps_ you can add and most of them are to add functionalities or are thematic, like for example `homebrew/science` for formulas related to science packages or `osgeo/osgeo4mac` for formulas related to geography and GIS. As you've noticed the name of the _taps_ are somethings like this: `some-name/some-name`. The reason for that is because _taps_ are GitHub repositories by default although you can _tap_ any git repository, even local ones, so the _tap_ names correspond to `github-username/repository`. Therefore, and through this simple mechanism, you can create your own _taps_ and share them with anyone, and, conversely, add anyone taps.

For example I've installed a _tap_ that adds functionalities to Homebrew-Cask, since the update capabilities aren't as great as with `homebrew/core`. The name of this _tap_ is `buo/cask-upgrade` and you can check the repository [here](https://github.com/buo/homebrew-cask-upgrade). With the original Cask functionalities you can only know which casks are outdated using `brew cask outdate` and force brew to "update" each of them with:

```shell
brew cask install -f cask-formula-name # -f to force to force the install of the new version
```

However if you use buo's _tap_ you just need to type:

```shell
brew cu
```

and that's it. You can even add the flags `-a` and `-y` to autoupdate and to not ask questions. Yet, you have to be aware that [some people on the team of homebrew cask doesn't like buo's tap or at the very least they think it has some caveats](https://github.com/caskroom/homebrew-cask/issues/29301). So be careful when you implement it.

{% include figure image_path="assets/images/blog/2018/Screen-Shot-2017-11-21-at-09.32.02.png" alt="brew cu on my machine" caption="brew cu on my machine" %}

There are more commands you can use inside of Homebrew and Hombre-Cask. You can find more documentation about Homebrew [here](https://docs.brew.sh), and about Hombrew-Cask [here](https://github.com/caskroom/homebrew-cask#learn-more).

I don't want to finalize without sharing with you the line I use to update and upgrade my Homebrew.

```shell
brew update && brew upgrade && brew cleanup && brew prune && brew cu -ay && brew cask cleanup
```

You already know the purpose of `prune` deletes the unnecessary symbolic links.

Happy brewing :beers:!
